I’d like to talk about the translation
of our publications,
and there’s a particular aspect
of translation I’d like to comment on.
Now, I know
that quite a number of you have moved
to a country
where your mother tongue isn’t spoken
—either to find work
or to serve where the need is greater.
And others are serving right at home
but in foreign-language congregations.
At times, you may have compared
an article in your mother tongue
with the same article in your second language
and found differences in the translation,
and you might wonder why that is.
Well, we’d never conclude
that the translators
had been unfaithful or careless
or that they were running
ahead of the organization.
No.
We trust
our hardworking brothers and sisters.
So we know there must be
good reasons for the differences,
and the purpose of this brief discussion
is to suggest what some
of those reasons might be.
First, a word about one
of the principles our translators follow.
They’re expected not only to render
the thought in the English text accurately
but also to keep in mind
the way people speak.
So accuracy, clarity,
and naturalness are needed
while maintaining the dignity of our message.
Now, what’s involved
in preparing a translation
that’s both accurate and natural?
It’s not as if the translators
are like the Jewish scribes
who made copies of the Hebrew Scriptures.
To make sure that the copies they made
were accurate in every detail,
they would count not only every word
but also every letter
they copied from the source text.
Translation is not like that.
It’s not as if there must be
seven words in the target language
if there are seven words in English.
Every word in English may not be translated,
but the complete thought
of the English has to be there.
English makes effective use of repetition.
What do we mean by that?
Well, you can write one sentence in English
and then repeat the same thought
in slightly different words
in the next sentence,
and it sounds fine.
But in some languages,
to repeat a thought
would be viewed as poor writing,
and that wouldn’t reflect well
on our publications.
So in such cases,
the translators are allowed to combine
two sentences into just one sentence
as long as the thought
is completely conveyed.
Or they might make two sentences
out of one long English sentence
if that’s more natural in the language.
So you can’t always compare
the length of an English paragraph
with the length of the paragraph
in the target language and say,
“Hey, this paragraph
is shorter than that paragraph.”
Sometimes we hear brothers
who have learned a second language say:
“I don’t see why the translators
didn’t follow the English word for word.
After all,
you can say that in the language.”
Well, you may have the words.
It may be possible to “say” that,
but would a literal translation
sound strange to native speakers?
No matter how well a foreigner
has learned a language,
native speakers who speak
the language well
are usually the best judge
of what is natural.
Modesty will help foreign speakers
to recognize that.
There’s another thing
that foreign speakers need to be aware of.
If they’re vocal
in their criticism of a certain translation,
how would that affect
the confidence of native speakers
who have to rely on the translation
for their spiritual food?
Of course, nobody is perfect,
and as long as translation
is done by imperfect people,
it won’t be perfect.
But rest assured that our translators
take their work very seriously.
The subject of translation is complex.
And I’m surely no expert.
Let’s hear from some brothers
who have worked in the field for many years
and see what we can learn.
Meet Nick Ahladis,
Nick Exarcheas,
and Saki Marais.
As we have just heard,
the goal of translators is to convey ideas
accurately, naturally, and clearly.
This isn’t an easy thing to do.
Let’s discuss
a few of the challenges of translation.
We will focus on three areas
and see why translators
make the choices they do:
Bible expressions,
illustrations,
and vocabulary.
So our first point is Bible expressions.
Nick, could you please tell us
why translating some expressions in the Bible
can be very challenging?
Well, before our brothers and sisters
receive the New World Translation
in their language,
they have to use Bibles
produced by Christendom.
Often, these Bibles
contain false religious ideas
and terms that reflect those ideas.
So when we produce the New World Translation,
great care has to be taken
not to allow such terms
to distort our translation.
Can you give us an example of an expression
that was translated the wrong way
in the Bibles produced by Christendom?
Well, one example is the term “holy spirit.”
In many Bibles produced by Christendom,
the term gives the idea
of a spirit creature in heaven,
even a “holy ghost,”
sometimes even a “holy demon.”
That must be very confusing to the readers.
But what can the translators do about that?
In many languages,
our translators have found
that the closest way
to translate “holy spirit”
is to say “holy power” or “holy force.”
This may sound very different,
but it conveys the same idea.
And even the English New World Translation
describes the term “holy spirit”
as “God’s active force” at Genesis 1:2,
while other English translations
say “God’s holy spirit.”
Good.
So now the brothers
can use an expression
that is understood
by the field and the audience.
But it must be a wonderful thing
to have the New World Translation.
Yes, it’s a wonderful thing.
But still, the brothers
have to get used to the new terms.
Remember that they’ve been using
the original terms
in their local Bibles for years
to teach people the truth.
But as they get used to the new terminology
in their personal study,
at meetings, and in the ministry,
they begin to see
the benefits of the new terms,
and afterward they really embrace
the New World Translation.
Thank you.
Now let us go to the second challenge,
illustrations.
Why are illustrations
particularly difficult to translate?
An illustration that works in one culture
might not work in another.
Illustrations are only effective
if the reader can relate to them.
And that’s why Jesus used illustrations
based on everyday things
that his audience was familiar with,
such as farming, building, fishing.
And today, our publications
also use illustrations
that people can relate to.
I remember an article
that discussed the need
for us to be patient in difficult situations.
And it used the illustration
of a driver who is stuck in traffic.
Now, one translation team
wrote to the Translator Help Desk,
and they explained that most of their readers
were not familiar with traffic jams.
For someone who lives in a big city,
that sounds unbelievable, but it’s true.
So the team wanted to use
a different illustration.
They are familiar with the idea
of people standing in long lines,
waiting for their maize, or corn,
to be ground at the milling machine.
And this illustration was approved
because it would help
their readers to get the point:
They need to be patient.
Now, these are
completely different illustrations,
but the point
—or the message—
is the same, for example,
then, about being patient.
Now, when we read in our language edition
of The Watchtower or other publication
a different illustration
than the one we read in English,
we can be confident
that the translators received approval
to make this adjustment
so that the right message is conveyed.
Well, that was very helpful.
Thank you.
Now let us go to our third challenge
—that of vocabulary,
that is,
the words that are used in a language.
Now, we might assume
that for every important word
in our language
there will be an exact equivalent
in another language.
Well, translation
is much more complicated than that.
Take, for example, the word “peace.”
Some years back,
we had a convention about godly peace.
And one might think,
‘Well, that’s an easy word to translate.’
But that word was used about 350 times
in talks on the convention
—sometimes referring to peace
between God and man,
sometimes referring to peace
in family or with our neighbors,
and other times
referring to peace of mind.
Now, in some languages,
there’s simply no way
to use just one word
to convey all those aspects of peace
because they have one word
for the kind of peace that God gives,
a different word for when there’s no war
in a country (that kind of peace),
and a different word to indicate that people
are getting along with one another.
So those translators
need to understand the point
of each usage in the context
and then convey
the right translation accordingly.
Now it opens our minds
to how wonderfully Jehovah made us,
with the capacity to think and feel
and have many concepts and ideas
and to have the ability
to express them in our language
—in words—
to use words for that.
But we express them
in so many different ways.
Yes, it’s so true.
Every language has its own vocabulary
and way of expressing things.
What I find very interesting
is how other languages
render standard expressions
that we use as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
For example,
“field service,” “circuit overseer,”
“Kingdom Hall,” “special pioneer”
—those expressions
were first used in English,
and then translators
had to come up with equivalents
in their languages
so that it would make sense.
But that wouldn’t be difficult
—would it?—
because for the word “kingdom”
surely we have
another word in another language,
and for the word “hall”
we have an equivalent word.
And all you have to do
is put the two words together
to translate “Kingdom Hall.”
They may have the words,
but a literal translation of “Kingdom Hall”
could mean something totally different.
Now, some countries still have a king.
In those places,
this “Kingdom Hall” could mean
“government office,” or it could mean
“hall belonging to the kingdom
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
So that would be totally misleading.
And that’s why the Governing Body
has given approval to say
the “Meeting Place of Jehovah’s Witnesses”
or the “Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
Even though the expressions
sound a little bit different,
the basic intent is the same,
and people get the right idea.
So it is obvious
that the challenges of translation are huge.
But now the question is,
How can a newly formed translation team
or one in a very remote location
have the confidence
and have the assurance
that they produce
the highest standard possible?
Well, all translation teams,
regardless of size or location,
benefit from regular communication
with the Writing Committee
of the Governing Body.
Well, we understand that the Governing Body
directs matters from headquarters,
but do they really know
what the translators are doing?
Well,
the Writing Committee trusts the translators,
but at the same time,
they don’t try to micromanage their work.
What they have done
is set in place training programs
to teach translators
basic translation principles
to help them to understand
how to apply those principles
when translating the publications.
And this ensures that the same message
is being conveyed regardless of language.
And when they’re not sure that their solution
is exactly right on target,
they can write to the Writing Committee
and ask for direction
to inquire whether this solution
conveys the right idea in the context.
Also, the Writing Committee answers
hundreds of translation questions every week
as part of the ongoing training of the teams.
All of the translators
have access to these answers
so that they can learn from one another
how to solve problems
that are delicate and difficult.
This effective communication system
really helps to unify
the thinking of all the translators
and to make sure
that they all produce the same message.
And that unifies
the thinking of the worldwide field.
Well, thank you very much
for explaining those factors
affecting translation,
and it is impressive
that Jehovah has an arrangement in place
that reverses the effect of Babel.
And it is also so wonderful
that by means of his holy spirit,
Jehovah unifies his people around the earth
regardless of what language they use.
Thanks, brothers.
You’ve given us an even deeper appreciation
for all of the work involved
in making a quality translation.
I learned a lot.
I’m sure our audience did too.